---
aliases: FCS, 50.042, cybersecurity
tags: 50.042
---
[Lab website](https://github.com/istd50042/lab2022_student)

## Schedule
| Week | Topic                           | Notes                                                              | Remarks              |
| ---- | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------- |
| 1    | Introduction, Basic ciphers     | [[Introduction to security]] , [[Basic ciphers]] , [[Basic Linux]] |                      |
| 2    | Hash functions                  | [[Hash functions]]                                                 |                      |
| 3    | Hash, password                  | [[Hashing applications]], [[Passwords]]                            |                      |
| 4    | block ciphers                   | [[Block ciphers]]                                                  |                      |
| 5    | Modular arithmetics             | [[Modular Arithmetic]]                                             |                      |
| 6    | Key exchange, public key crypto | [[Key Establishment]] , [[50.042 Midterm review]]                  |                      |
| 7    | RECESS                          | [[Public key cryptography]]                                        |                      |
| 8    | Digital signatures, protocols   |                                                                    | Midterm, CTF starts  |
| 9    | Side channel, zero-knowledge    |                                                                    | Guest lectures (TBC) |
| 10   | Policies                        |                                                                    |                      |
| 11   | Information flow                |                                                                    |                      |
| 12   | Distributed system              |                                                                    |                      |
| 13   | Project, revision               |                                                                    |                      |
| 14   | Final                           |                                                                    |                      |
[[lab2 part1 report]]

What to do if you found a security problems/vulnerabilities  
Responsible disclosure:  
1. Notify producer of vulnerability, but provide a deadline for  
patches
2. Go public after the deadline  
3. This gives producer time to react, but forces him to action  
4. You can get paid through bug bounty programmes

## Grades:  
- 40% labs (12% from group projects)  
- 20% mid-term  
- 25% final exam  
- 5% participation

## Main contents:  
- Cryptographic Primitives (Public/Private key, Hashing,  
Analysis)  
- Cryptographic Protocols (Key establishment, Secure  
Channels)  
- Others (Security Policies, Information flow, Distributed  
Systems)

#### Course Description
This course provides students with a basic appreciation and understanding of the core concepts of information security. Topics to be covered include concepts for confidentiality, integrity and availability; introduction to cybercrimes and security issues; threats to information systems and devices; cryptographic primitives such as symmetric and asymmetric cryptography; core problems such as random number generation, entropy, and key distribution; and common topics such as security protocols and public‐key infrastructures.

#### Learning Objectives
1.  List basic security solutions and models; explain concepts for confidentiality, integrity and availability.
2.  Apply protocols used for key establishment, encryption, and authentication to secure a system.
3.  Apply known attacks to vulnerable cryptographic primitives.
4.  Model, analyse, and apply cryptographic primitives used for encryption, secure hashing, and digital signatures.
5. Design security solutions to achieve specific security goals in a system
6.  Evaluate the security of existing system designs respect to different attacker models.

#### Measurable Outcomes
1.  Evaluate security models like CIA model (confidentiality, integrity, availability) by defining and assessing security level for an existing system in a design project
2.  Perform attacks related to block ciphers in Electronic‐Codebook mode, through successful retrieval of partial or full information related to the plaintext or key used, and  
    show the outcome of the attacks.
3.  Implement a scheme for pre‐image recovery of hashes through brute force and hybrid attacks for hash related password authentication systems.
4.  Apply substitution ciphers, One‐time‐pads, and AES in real‐life applications to prevent sensitive data exposure and thus preserve the confidentiality of secret data.
5.  Analyse network logs , based on that, implement potential attacks on schemes for encryption, authentication, key establishment and digital signatures, through a challenge design and solving project.

#### Topics Covered
-   Introduction
-   Hash Functions
-   Password and Rainbow Tables
-   Applications for Hashing
-   Block Ciphers
-   Modular Arithmetics
-   Key Establishment
-   Public Key Crypto
-   Digital Signatures
-   Security Protocols
-   Side Channel Attacks
-   Security Policy
-   Information Flow
-   Distributed Systems