---
tags: #02.137
---

## Background
Representation of women’s bodies have varied over time, with some extreme fluctuations over the years, and have been captured through each period through various mediums. These come in the form of modern-day photographs, to classical paintings, some dating way back to the earliest sculptures like Upper Palaeolithic Venus Figurines.

As mass media increases in presence, it is not uncommon for behaviours of the public to lean towards the mimicking of trends, especially when they go viral. It is then a given that mainstream media plays a great role in shaping the direction of thoughts and perceptions of the masses (Entman, 1989). This has been demonstrated through the times, be it in political ideologies or introduction of unconventional ideas like recruiting women into the workforce during World War 2, created to alter or reinforce predominant mindsets. A common thread among these are the imagery that accompany such ideas, with their ability to create strong impressions and hold influence over viewers when used expertly, in tandem with persuasive captions and text (Joffe, 2008).

The portrayal of popular, ‘ideal’ body types through mainstream art and media has similarly been present regardless of time, culture, and location, applying traditionally not only to women but men as well. These include varying criteria such as body proportions, shapes, and sizes. From the popularized thin bodies of the Flapper era to modern day sought after athletic bodies, it can be argued that mainstream media in fashion may have a significant role in defining the body types that are popularized, largely through the imagery perpetuated by silhouettes of outfits and figures of models involved.

## Purpose
The goal of this proposal is to learn the role of fashion in changing body image perceptions, and how portrayal of such fashion can influence, or be influenced by significant cultural or socio-economic factors. Additionally, the proposal aims seeks to discover the impacts such trends can have on women from the disparity of images published against the actual bodies of women at the time.

## Objectives
The objective of this proposal is to identify the various body types promoted across different periods, centring around the 1900s to modern timeframe, done by analysing body proportions of women portrayed in fashion magazines from the U.S. Additionally, the contexts related to such imagery, if any, will be examined for frequently appearing keywords related to the body to determine the descriptions of such body types, such as magazine articles and advertisements. Lastly, to find effects of significant cultural events that correspond to drastic changes in predominant body silhouettes, against the average body types of women from each point of time.

## Significance
As written by Harrison and Cantor (1997), “The highest reported prevalence of disordered eating occurred during the 1920s and 1980s, the two periods during which the 'ideal woman' was thinnest in US history.”

It is important that we recognise the possible impacts fashion can have on body image, and how such fashion trends change the corresponding advertised focus for better or for worse. This is particularly as we live in a time where mental health and body positivity ideas are becoming more prevalent while mainstream media continues to heavily edit images of models to further enhance their looks to levels that may be unrealistic even for the models themselves. Especially in recent years, there has been greater recognition that negative body images can put people at higher risk of certain mental health conditions, including eating disorders and depression (Grabe, Ward, & Hyde, 2008).

## Review of What’s in a Face? Gender representation of faces in Time, 1940s-1990s (Jofre, Cole, Berardi, Bennett, & Reale, 2020)
This paper was inspired by the research into the correlation between the proportion of women’s faces appearing in the Times magazine over time and the social factors, namely the rise of the feminist movement corresponding to their fluctuations at different points of time.

Besides their findings, however, were their analysis methods that caught my interest, especially with their incorporation of machine learning methods like convolutional neural network VGGFace (p. 4, Jofre, Cole, Berardi, Bennett, & Reale, 2020) to automatically categorise faces based on training data, together with human testing by outsourcing to human resources via Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) (p. 3, Jofre, Cole, Berardi, Bennett, & Reale, 2020) for both custom-built web applications as well as manpower to perform close readings and annotations for datasets. This combination of close and distant reading methods set up the research to reach its conclusions by developing a more inclusive context to the quantity of faces being measured through qualitative methods.

## Research questions of proposed project
Some of the questions underlying in this proposal would be as follows: What are the language and images used to promote certain body types? How does the projected trending body type differ from that of women who lived at the time? Does this disparity correlate to any detrimental effects on self-perceptions of women and result in real consequences, such as in health of women?

## Proposed Methodology
For this paper, I propose a multi-layered approach, assuming that all resources are available to be used and are viable methods for research, with sufficient time that can be invested into it.

Firstly, data used would be the collection of images from women’s fashion magazines across the years, one of which includes Vogue that has been largely present through the years, wellestablished as an indicator for fashion trends. Besides Vogue, the popular women’s entertainment magazine Cosmopolitan will also be used, due to its wide-reaching influence throughout the decades and its presence in mainstream media even today. These can be referenced against collections from the University of Vermont’s Landscape Change Program with relation to Women’s clothing category by the decades for accuracy and categorizing of trend types later. For the comparison to the bodies of everyday women, I would use the image collection from the New York Public Library titled Everyday Life and Women in America, c1800-1920 as a reference point for older comparisons, and relevant archives of images that portray everyday women in them from then onwards, such as images from Women’s Day rallies for more recent image sets.

The data would then processed by the use of fully convolutional network RetinaNet developed by Facebook AI Research (FAIR) (Lin, Goyal, Girshick, He, & Dollárto, 2017) first pick out presence of faces of women to narrow down the datasets, followed by reprocessing of the new dataset under the criteria that the bodies of the new data are at least almost completely in view. This helps to sieve out noise in the datasets including but not limited to unrelated product advertisements and background imagery.

Once narrowed down, the body dimensions of such images can be further analysed by automated body feature extraction methods from 2D images (Lin & Wang, 2011) to allow for detection of proportion of body parts and their ratios to be recorded for each image. For identified image sets, their related text bodies will also be analysed by tools such as HathiTrust Bookworm to generate ‘distant reading’ or abstractions across the texts to pick up on keywords across various decades in time that are related to the body or shapes, and allows us to observe how the emphasis on different body parts actually change over time in relation to the body ratios presented by the datasets. The data collected can be sorted into 2 portions, the ratio between body parts, as well as the overall body shape as provided by the common categorization of body shapes (Simmons, Istook & Devarajan, 2004) for adult females based on multiple view analysis conducted.

Lastly, close reading will be done by a sufficient manpower —a large group of people via aforementioned AMT—rather than guided automation seen so far in the previous datasets. At each point of time where there are either significant change of prevalent body ratios, to identify possible socioeconomical contextual clues before and after such changes, or where there are significant outliers, reading into both the text of the image set as well as the accompanying articles in the magazines will occur, annotated by readers. The annotations will then be processed again to gather commonly surfacing ideas and key phrases, guided under either significant people or events happening.

The trends will then be observed and compared, such as visualising the data of body ratios by decades in multi-dimensional space to analyse if trends see returns and similarities with older models, and if they do, if there are any external factors that repeated to drive them that way, or for any outliers. The body ratios can also be compared against known actual body types of everyday women at different points in time to model for disparities. These models can then be compared against recorded trends in eating disorders and self-image perceptions by women to observe any correlations between disparity of projected and actual body types and wellness of women with changing fashion trends.

## Research Limitations
This proposal, however, sees some limitations.

Firstly, its scope has been centred around the U.S. and its magazines. This would mean that the findings reflected may not be representative of trends observed in other regions and demographics, as the socio-economic factors that influence body image may be different and the standard body types also vary from that of U.S..

Secondly, the extensiveness of conclusions would be limited due to the nature of the sources. One could argue that the popular magazines, especially in the 1900s, were likely consumed more by affluent women who could afford keeping up with trends, and those who fell into the popular beauty stereotype demographic, resulting in the less common representation of minority or less well-off groups. This could mean that such underrepresented groups may have to deal with greater body image issues, especially given that genetically different demographics take on different physical features, as compared to their more represented counterparts. Images from then could also be more biased towards photographing such demographics, and not being properly representative of the common body types at any point of time, and accessibility to such images may also be limited due to scarcity.

Additionally, Cosmopolitan saw a majority of men in the position of editor-in-chief through the years, who are responsible for directing the magazine in its contents, which may result in content being published for women to consume, but not necessarily by women with their interests in mind, as also brought up in the article that inspired this project, where only men were allowed to take the critical positions of writers and editors in the Times magazine until after 1970 (p. 15, Jofre, Cole, Berardi, Bennett, & Reale, 2020). This could mean that the magazines could be have a conflict between reflecting contents that the media at the time wanted women to follow, versus what women actually wanted to do, particularly in the post-war scene where women finally entered the workforce in the masses

## Conclusion
In conclusion, I hope that this project proposal will be able to bridge the understanding of how fashion in the past has been influenced by socio-economic factors and events, and how it has impacted its consumers in the past to present. Being able to draw conclusions related to the disparity between images presented to women against their actual builds could help us to recognise promotion patterns in the text and imagery presented by the industry in the future better. This is especially so as fast fashion and beauty becomes increasingly commonplace, creating standards that may be unhealthy or unrealistic for the masses to pursue, and it is critical for consumers to be aware of the influences that these media trends may have on them, and be mindful of how to separate trending fashion from unhealthy forms.