---
tags: 02.110
---
[[02.110DH The Chinese Lyrical Tradition - Arts, Literature and Landscape Design]]

The following are questions for your mid-term paper, which is due at the end of the day on **Sunday, July 3rd** **at 6 PM** (Week 7). Your paper should be within **1,000 words in length**, **double-spaced**, **formatted in 12-point font with 1-inch margins**. As always, you must include your name and student ID on all essays.

You do not need to use outside secondary sources for your paper—in fact, I encourage you not to rely on outside sources. More importantly, you must engage with the primary texts that we have read throughout this semester and use evidence from these texts to substantiate your claims and demonstrate your knowledge of the course materials. If you do use outside sources, you must properly cite your texts using footnotes or parenthetical formatting, using any standard format (e.g., MLA, Chicago, APA, etc.)

1)      Using examples from the text, answer, what are the key themes and artistic techniques used in the _Book of Odes_? What is "Xing"? What is the significance of "Xing" in the _Book of Odes_?



2)      Using examples from the text, answer, what is the main theme of the _Nine Songs_? How does the natural imagery used in the _Nine Songs_ differ from that of _Book of Odes_?

3)      Using examples from the text, answer, what are the similarities and differences of Qu Yuan's self-image and Tao Yuanming’s? What is the relationship between the natural imagery used in their poems and their self-image?

4)      Using examples of poetry, discuss the characteristics of the female figures in _Nine Songs_, “_Goddess of Luo”_, and _nineteen Old Poems_. What is the continuity of the representation of these female figures?

5)      Using examples from poetry, answer how are natural landscapes represented in Chinese Rhapsody? And how did these natural landscapes influence the representation of nature in the poetry of Xie Lingyun and Wang Wei?